foreign
experience comes down to our ability to
communicate we've just come to accept
the limitations of human communication
and that's a shame our mission is to
improve lives by improving communication
Clarity consistency conciseness tone
inclusive language checks brownies were
the first writing tool at scale to help
people with the content itself you know
as we've built the company we've been
fortunate to develop an absolutely
incredible team we have an opportunity
to build a new category here and you
know frankly we're enjoying the journey
very much we're very thankful to be able
to help you know tens of millions of
people around the world every day and
Empower people to communicate and
connect in ways that they haven't been
able to in the past that's the promise
of our future
[Music]
hello good morning it's great to see
each of you thanks for joining today
just to kick off out of curiosity how
many here had heard of grammarly
prior to signing up for today's session
just raise your hand wow that has a lot
of hands maybe 80 thank you and how many
in the audience have actually used
grammarly specifically for work of some
sort
paid product free product Enterprise
product individual product at some point
raise your hand
awesome more than half excellent
well for those who have not used
grammarly or not familiar with grammarly
we provide an AI powered communication
assistant we help people all around the
world improve the quality and impact of
their written communication and nowhere
is that more important than at work and
in business
we help over 50 000 teams improve their
communication and drive results at about
as many companies globally we also help
over 30 million individuals improve the
quality and impact of their writing so
they can accomplish their goals and live
Fuller lives
we help our users through over half a
million applications we support these
applications with browser Integrations
desktop mobile
and more recently we introduced a text
editor SDK in beta that enables
third-party applications to integrate
grammarly directly and provide our AI
powered communication assistance
directly in those workflows
so we've come a long way in our 13 plus
years we've built a nice business we've
been cash flow positive pretty much
since Inception
we've made a lot of mistakes as well
along that journey and those mistakes
have led to really valuable learnings
and my goal is to share some of those
learnings with each of you today in
hopes that you can use those on your
respective Journeys
So speaking of Journeys we like to
compare our progress at grammarly to
hiking I should say climbing a big
mountain like Everest
the reality is that whether you're
building an institution for the long
term or hiking a mountain you want to
take a lot of time up front to make sure
that it's going to be both a meaningful
Journey
and a worthwhile climb
in our case our mission as you heard a
little bit ago is improving lives by
improving communication
communication is a really really hard
problem most of us are left
to our own devices from a pretty early
age to figure out how to communicate
this Rich perspective that we have
through a tiny figurative straw a spoken
or written communication
in addition we need to actually select
the words to use and have those words
land as intended with whoever we're
talking to
that is a really heavy lift requires not
just empathy but also a lot of context
on how we're talking to and inevitably
communication breaks down at many points
along the way as a result
gets even harder when we communicate
among many people
and Technology was supposed to solve
this if we go back 10 20 30 years
communication was supposed to get easier
as technology evolved
in fact we have much more communication
than we've had in the past
an example of that you know if we think
about email or IM or text
you know there's more asynchronous or
async communication than there's
probably ever been but the challenge
with this communication is we lose the
non-verbals that we get when we're
talking to someone in person
and so we can't calibrate how our
message is landing and adjust what we're
saying or ask follow-up questions to
make sure that our points actually
landed with the other person
and so we go about our lives and put out
all these messages and then sometime
later we realize that maybe someone's
gone a little or pretty far off course
or maybe worse we've offended someone
without knowing it haven't been able to
to write that
at the same time communication is
critical to doing most of what we do as
people where social beings we're made to
work together in teams communication
unites us
communication is also an input to pretty
much every level of Maslow's hierarchy
and given that
it's critical to pretty much every
function in a company at least every
function that has
more than one team member
and given that it impacts every aspect
of the p l although it's all often
overlooked
so grammarly helps users understand
whether or not the communication is
likely to be effective and then how to
improve it to ensure that it actually
lands as intended enables them to drive
the results they want to drive
now if you select a big mission
you want to make sure that you have a
big Market to support that mission
and ultimately when you think about a
market you want to think about the
problem you're solving and recognize
that
uh you only want to capture a little bit
of the value that you've created if you
want to create an institution for the
long term you want to be sustainable uh
you need to give much more than you take
and that means that you need to start
with a huge Market
in grammar's case we always knew that
communication was a large Market because
it's relevant to just about everywhere
in the world and we do it all throughout
the day
but we wanted to quantify that and
earlier this year I did a poll with
Harris
in that pool we learned that just U.S
businesses which is a small fraction of
Global Communication
lose over a trillion dollars a year 1.2
trillion
to ineffective communication and that
doesn't include
all of the Lost opportunity to unlock
problems uh reduce unnecessary disputes
unleash creativity
that great communication can deliver so
this is a relatively small estimate of
that opportunity that seems like a
really large number until you realize
the fact that about half the time team
spend teams spend working together
is uh communication focused and teams
lose on average about a day a week to
ineffective communication
so those numbers add up very very
quickly Business Leaders know this 93 of
Business Leaders believe that
communication
is the backbone of business and 82
percent of Business Leaders are actually
really concerned about the impact that
remote work has on communication
and that's because the point I mentioned
before in the act in the absence of
in-person communication we lose the
ability to understand whether or not our
message is landed and that slows us down
makes it hard to build trusting
relationships
to name a couple examples
so we have a really really uh you know
unique opportunity here
to drive results in the Enterprise and
as a result have very broad relevance in
doing that and as you think about your
respective markets you want to make sure
those are big enough that you can
capture a small piece of it small piece
of value you're creating and still have
a very significant amount of resources
drive the great missions that you've all
selected
so another topic that comes to mind when
we think about selecting a mountain
is timing
one of my favorite questions is why now
what is it that makes this the right
time to do the thing
generally speaking of something could
have been done before but wasn't there's
probably a reason and so before you set
out in this journey you want to
understand what that reason is and save
yourselves potentially some time
a great place to start is by looking at
the tectonic shifts that are happening
in the technology or perhaps the market
if you think about a compelling Mission
like the moon landing as one example
if that had been tried 10 years before
it would have been much more costly
taken much more time been very risky and
may not have succeeded
likewise if it was tried 10 years later
it may not have been as relevant so
timing really matters a lot in
grammarly's case when we launched in
2009 it was the Advent of cloud
computing Big Data with it the evolution
accelerating evolution of NLP or natural
language processing related algorithms
and that created an opening for us
to introduce our communication system
more recently with the acceleration of
remote work given kovid employers are
looking for tools to help their team
members communicate effectively remotely
which is you know one of the many use
cases for grammarly and so we've seen a
big uptake there given that market shift
and opportunity
another
question that comes up when considering
timing is you want to be an early mover
or a fast follower
fast followers have the advantage of
seeing all the different mountains that
are being climbed and the paths that
people are taking and selecting one that
looks promising falling in that path and
trying to win in the last mile
and that's valuable at the end of the
day this is how you know the industry
the ecosystem kind of works together to
solve really hard problems for the
broader community
so there's a lot of value in being a
fast follower
you want to make sure in that case uh
that you'll be able to be successful and
one thing to consider is especially the
applications you know does this
application have any network effects
certainly an example of applications
that do our machine learning powered
applications that have Data Network
effects grammarly is an example of that
in our case as an early mover that
enabled us to really build a very high
quality set of suggestions to drive
these results very broad suggestions
very deep and explainable so that we
could say not just what needs to be
changed but why it needs to be changed
and then also very precise feedback high
levels low levels of false positive and
false negatives
so uh the other point I mention the
other advantage of being an early mover
is you get to
[Music]
create something that didn't exist in
the world before so you can actually
um
you know start with a mission pull
together an amazing team work through
really hard problems make lots of
mistakes develop deep relationships in
the process and at the end of the day
bring something into the world that
hasn't existed before so it's just a
really special journey and it's not
something that I would trade so my vote
would certainly be for for doing
something new
so once you've selected your Mountain
the next step is of course to climb the
mountain and the way you do that at
least as a product company is with an
exceptional product
you build an exceptional product by
focusing on your users and their
problems
we do that at grammarly by figuratively
putting our users at the center of our
decisions we like to think about them as
sitting in the real or virtual
conference table providing input as we
are you know doing our our day-to-day
work to ensure that we're constantly
evolving our product to better help and
support them
and of course our users are often not
actually in those meetings that means
each of us need to go really deep to
understand our users at a very very
granular level and how do we do that
well first off just by talking to users
every chance we get I had the
opportunity to talk to three users this
morning backstage which was spectacular
we always look for feedback and
understand people's experiences directly
first and foremost
secondly we look for
um ambient feedback in Social channels
support through other functions that
sent to us directly that's a really
great source of input
as we grow our user base we could then
start using engagement data to see how
our users actually
utilizing the product
and inferring from that what's going
great what we could do better
two caveats there first off you need to
think about
the users that you have and whether or
not they're representative of the users
you expect to have in the future
if they're not you're looking in the
rear view mirror
the second thing to consider is that the
leading indicators of value choose to
measure that engagement need to be
aligned with your long-term goals
likewise if they're not they may lead
you in the wrong direction
with all that feedback we can you know
take all this we also built a research
team at grammarly which has been very
helpful in going uh broad with users
deep understanding qualitative and
quantitative input
across many different segments personas
use cases and so we take all this
together to deeply understand you know
each of our users how they layer up to
personas and how that nests with
segments and that helps us improve our
current product our current Horizon uh
every day
now if you're building an institution
for the long term you're going to need
multiple product Horizons
and when you look beyond your current
product Horizon sometimes it's a little
harder to figure out exactly what it's
going to be by talking only to users so
the key is to start with that deep user
feedback and understanding as your
foundation
and then abstract a bit
kind of blur your vision and look for
the similarities among all those users
and also look for the differences
and with that you can start to see the
Green Field emerge that might be your
next product Horizon
now when you do this you got to be
careful because it can introduce a bit
of hubris
and it's really important to use a
hypothesis driven approach to you know
test this New Horizon that you've come
up with
and do that by front loading you know
the riskiest elements and actually
testing those elements directly with
users to make sure those users do in
fact value it as you expect
so that you know the time and energy and
money that's being invested will be well
spent
in uh in grammarly's case
going back to the very early days we
wanted to align our interest with our
users and we did that by selecting a
business model where we're only paid in
our case subscriptions by our end users
that ensured that when we're sitting in
these meetings we don't have any violab
loyalties we're there to serve our users
and them only
likewise it was very clear from the
early days that privacy and security was
critical to our users we have a very
intimate product experience and so
privacy and security was foundational we
like to call it our first future we
invested heavily in that from the
beginning
we also worked with our users to improve
the very first version of grammarly
which was essentially a spell and
grammar checker as our name suggests
that enabled us to get their feedback on
our specific suggestions and evolve
those to make those even more effective
but as we took a step back and listened
to what our users were telling us what
became clear is that the reason many of
them were looking to write accurately
was not necessarily because they only
cared about writing accurately but
rather because they viewed that as an
input to a higher order problem
which in this case was accomplishing
their communication goals or their goals
more broadly
and so we took that as our next Horizon
many years ago
and moved beyond the mechanics of
writing things like spelling and grammar
feedback to include much High Road
points like Clarity consistency
conciseness tone inclusive language
checks just to name a few and all of
this feedback together enabled us
provide an end-to-end ai-powered
communication assistant that augmented
people's communication skills enabling
them to accomplish their goals Drive
results and do whatever it is they
wanted to do in their lives and that was
really the core of the value that we
were providing even in those early days
but we were able to expand that by
taking a step back there
so once you build a great product now
you want to grow it of course products
in a vacuum don't mean much without
users so how do you do that well one
great way to do it is with product leg
growth or plg for those who are new to
the term the idea is that the product
can actually sell itself without ever
talking to someone that's an incredibly
High bar
it's very very difficult to do
but it's also very very valuable because
if done right it allows you to grow fast
efficiently and actually learn in the
process
so how do you do this well I like to
think about it with an analogy of a
combination lock as you can see on the
screen here
imagine that each of these four digits
are product messaging marketing and
sales in that order
we just talked about what you need to do
to build a great product
in the case of messaging it starts with
understanding your use cases
the users that have those the personas
those users represent and the segments
this personas layer up to that can feed
both the product and also marketing
marking of course then goes and takes
that information and finds potential
users they want to do that in a
cost-effective way qualify the users to
some level and bring them back to sales
one of the best forms of marketing
course is Word of Mouth grammarly
benefits extensively from Word of Mouth
given the quality of our product and
that's one of the benefits of
product-led growth
now in the case of sales If We Had A
salesperson
that person could overcome any
misalignments you know between the four
dimensions here if they existed they
could listen to the lead they could
overcome objections and perhaps close
the sale
but in the case of a plg motion that's
not possible because the the sales force
is essentially a self-serve funnel it's
comprised of a website a product and
possibly support as well and that funnel
needs to communicate very clearly to
each potential user exactly what the
solution is and whether or not so that
solves the user's problem and that needs
to be closely calibrated if it's under
calibrated and under sells what the
product provides then you have a
situation where someone leaves with a
problem that could have been solved
on the other hand if it oversells the
problem then you up and end up with
someone buying a product that's not
solve their problem you have bad Revenue
so the key is to constantly adjust the
fulcrum there and get to the point where
everyone who has the problem understands
this is a solution that needs that and
as a result buys the product without
ever talking to anyone
that takes a while in grammarly's case
it took us three years to build the
first version of our freemium model we
did that from 2012 to 2015.
but once we eventually unlocked it as I
mentioned earlier allowed us to grow
very fast it allows to grow very
efficiently in particular
um
cost effectively so we've been cash flow
positive you know since our early days
as a result of that
and enabled us to put our product at the
center of our go to market motion to
evolve our product and create more value
in our product more quickly as a result
of aligning uh the two undertakings
and the way we did that in our early
days was by starting with a exclusively
paid product
so in the early days someone had to put
down a credit card to get access to any
suggestions from grammarly and that was
a very high bar to ensure that what we
were building was something that users
really really needed and really really
found valuable
it also forced us to really focus a lot
on the user experience making sure it
was very fluid uh consistent easy and
not with that the onboarding process was
also consistent
a great measure of success there is the
Enterprise if you go into an Enterprise
launch a product and don't get many
questions from buyers or I.T or support
you know you've done something right in
that regard
in grammarly's case we have over
um well if you look at our Enterprise
customers they generally get value in
under 30 days and they do that with
little or no training which we think is
a great Testament to our plg motions
so once you have a great product a
successful plg motion now you got to
scale this through time and it's really
hard to scale because you need to keep
this combination lock aligned in each of
these functions as you grow uh you know
naturally evolve and how do you do that
well one of the things that we found
really helpful is values
As you move Beyond five or seven people
uh you know things break As you move
Beyond 150 you have another break point
and so you want to make sure that you
have a plan to address that as you scale
in our case our values our core values
they were shared among our original
leadership team in the early days and it
was the subset of those shared values
that we thought would make us successful
as a company
as a result these are ingrained and
pretty much everything we do at the
company they're used in decisions large
and small across you know our entire
team uh probably thousands or tens of
thousands of times per day
and so they just provide you know little
guides along the way to make sure we're
headed in the right direction
they happen to spell eager that's a
coincidence but if you walked into any
of our hubs while we're gathered I think
that's a great outward representation of
what you would see and feel and the
energy that our team has
I'll use a couple examples of
how our values have helped with plg
specifically if you think about empathy
this is basically our definition of
great communication
active listening putting yourself in the
other person's shoes understanding not
just the words they're saying but the
context with which they're saying it
updating our own internal perspectives
accordingly and then responding
that sounds pretty simple but it's
actually really hard and really rare
and so we strive to apply this in all
our conversations at grammarly and when
we're able to do that we unlock
creativity we solve problems we reduce
disputes and all these things together
enable us to move more quickly in the
right direction
remarkable the last on the list here
we Define is essentially having a growth
mindset
learning for the sake of it being
naturally curious but also recognizing
that the more you know the less you know
and so having a level of humility with
that knowledge that you gain
and that's very important in the case of
user feedback because when we're talking
to individual users
it's very easy to just bucket those
users in the personas OR segments that
we've identified
but the value of those conversations and
the breakthroughs comes in the
difference between what we know and that
person's perspective even if it's just
10 or one percent of perspective that's
where you know the really important
details are and as we get those details
across a large user base it leads to
breakthroughs big and small
so you've selected your Mountain you
have a great product in plg motion and
values to climate
now you want to enter the Enterprise
and in this case I'm using Enterprise to
mean a large organization
the good news is that Enterprise are
just made up of end users number one and
number two these end users can be
champions
or they can be detractors based on their
experience
and users also in the case of
applications at least you know determine
the success that application will have
long term in Enterprise if they
understand the value it provides if it's
easy to use if it's something that you
know integrates with the other workflows
they have chances are the impact will be
much greater and the retention those
accounts with it will be much higher
more recently employees are really being
empowered to find you know productivity
applications that help them be more
successful at work they can buy those
applications directly so many end users
are actually Enterprise buyers as well
in gradually's case we followed our
customers to the Enterprise
so in the early days it was clear that
we had users coming for professional
reasons personal reasons academic
reasons
and as they use grammarly for any of
those they'd adopt it across their lives
and that certainly included work
so the majority of our users were also
using grammarly at work we saw more and
more professional applications
represented more and more functions
broad geographies Industries different
sizes of companies
it became clear that if we really wanted
to serve our end users Well we'd also
need to serve the organizations that
they work with and for
so our first step in this direction
was to take our end user plg funnel and
update it to enable end users in the
Enterprise to procure for teams or
broader groups that included updating
the uh the funnel itself to enable
acquiring team-based accounts
introducing an admin dashboard a new
product functionality
and we had a good amount of success with
that we had assumed and hoped that with
that motion alone we could uh you know
have wall-to-wall implementations in in
large Enterprises
and we were half right
we had individual accounts in about half
of the Forbes 2000 which was something
we felt great about but we weren't
getting these wall-to-one
implementations as we dug into that the
reason as I'm sure is obvious to many of
you is that there are more stakeholders
in the Enterprise
those stakeholders start with the buyer
but also includes I.T maybe procurement
legal other functions
and the web-based funnel was not really
set up to think about how to identify
and align all those stakeholders
the second key Insight was that each of
these stakeholders required their own
new combination lock
which as we've talked about is a pretty
big undertaking
so to go through an example in the case
of products for buyers we wanted to
introduce an organization wide version
of grammarly that would drive value not
just for end users but also for the
organization
so we introduced new features there our
style guide features an example of that
our style guide enables entire teams or
organizations to communicate
consistently effectively with the same
vocabulary inclusive language tones that
are in line with the organization's
brand internally and externally so they
can drive better results
we also greatly expanded the
functionality of our administrative
dashboard to make it easier to use and
to make the value that we were driving
there more clear
in the case of the second dimension here
for messaging we'd always invested
heavily in privacy and security and that
certainly included Enterprise grade
security but we hadn't invested much in
communicating that to the market so
there's a big gap between the perception
of our security posture and the reality
of it
and so we addressed that in a variety of
ways including getting a host of
certifications you know we got these
certifications in under two years which
speaks to the quality of the foundation
we already had in place sock 2 type 2
ISO 27001 1718 PCI HIPAA
and you know this uh you know really
provided a big step forward in helping
I.T understand the fact that we had a
great product that could be a trusted
from a security perspective
in terms of marketing there were a lot
of new you know segment stakeholders
that we wanted to address that we
couldn't reach in our existing channels
so we built up a demand gen engine that
would allow us to do that
and ultimately the the biggest change in
this combination lock came in the case
of the sales team itself and so I've
reserved a separate slide for that here
sales in its purest form is matching a
real problem
with a real opportunity
when that happens it creates value out
of thin air it may be the only function
I know of that does that
and so you know there's there's immense
value there a self-serve funnel does
that in an automated way
but the challenges I mentioned before is
a self-center serve funnel at least of
the ones I've seen you can't effectively
align multiple stakeholders so the real
value that a sales Force brings
especially in large Enterprises is first
off understanding who the decision
makers are who the stakeholders are
making sure they have a common
understanding of the problem and fully
understand what their problem is that
they're trying to solve
and then testing whether or not the
solution that's being offered in fact
solves that problem or not
and when it does that leads to you know
immense value over time especially for
applications
and with it very long-term relationships
now that value doesn't come easily
putting a sales force takes resources
and time and patience
and it takes Focus not only on the sales
team itself but pretty much when every
function in the company which has some
role in supporting the sales team
so in grammarly's case we already had a
very successful business in plg motion
and as we made the decision to build out
our grammarly business sales
organization
we decided to to carve much of that out
into a separate group with a separate
senior leader
to build it up to a level of scale
and then to integrate it back into the
rest of grammarly cross-functionally to
ensure that they would be set up for
success and so that's what we've done
and that's now landed us at a current
position where we have two strong go to
market muscles one our plg motion and
second our sales enabled motion and
these two you know work together hand in
glove our plg motion helping to
introduce grammarly to end users also
helping to augment pieces of our sales
enabled process and then in the case of
the sales teams you know going
wall-to-wall in large Enterprises
so to summarize first off
put a lot of thought in the mountain you
select
chances are it's going to be a long
journey you want to be meaningful you
want to be worthwhile you want to make
sure you have the resources to deliver
on your mission and of course you want
to make sure the timing's right so you
have some Tailwinds to help you up this
figure to Mountain
secondly climb the mountain by building
an exceptional product do that by
focusing on your users
introduce a plg motion to actually
enable you not only to grow your user
base but to use your go to market
feedback to improve the product itself
and rest all that when I found strong
values Foundation
third if you choose to go into large
Enterprises in particular realize you
have new stakeholders to serve in each
of those stakeholders are going to
require their own combination lock
and of that the area that may require
the most focus and energy is building
your sales organization the
cross-function work to support it but
the output of that is incredibly
valuable and certainly you know worth
the investment there
[Music]